---
date: "2020-10-15T09:00:00-07:00"
title: "The path to production ready Dapr"
linkTitle: "The path to production ready Dapr"
author: Mark Fussell
type: blog
---

Dapr has now been out for exactly one year this week and in that time, we have received a tremendous amount of feedback, engagement, and contributions from developers. After 11 releases we are now putting Dapr on a path to a stable v1.0 release, meaning it can be used in production deployments. A v1.0 release also means that impactful changes go through a versioning processes and there are no breaking changes, as has been the case between the current beta releases.  A primary indicator for the readiness of a v1.0 release has been the close engagement that we have had with of a number of companies who have, or are, putting Dapr into production in the coming months running on Kubernetes, for which we are extremely grateful. 

From a timeline perspective our goal is to have the first v1.0 release candidate (RC) available in Nov 2020 and then release regular RC updates every couple of weeks with bug fixes and minor feature adds. For example, these will be v1.0.0-RC1, V1.0.0-RC2 etc.  We expect to have a final v1.0.0 release in Q1 of 2021, but as always this depends on the number of issues that arise and ensuring that fundamentals such as performance, security, scale and test coverage meet the stated release goals. Specifically, the v1.0 release is for the dapr, CLI, dotnet-sdk, java-sdk, python-sdk, go-sdk, dashboard and components-contrib repos. For the components-contrib repo, out of the 75+ components today around 15 will be certified for “GA production use”, with the rest remaining in “alpha” status, meaning they should not be used in production. We will publish the list of these when the first RC is released and provide guidance on how you can help expediate getting other alpha components to production status. Dapr is also designed to be hosting platform agnostic, however for the v1.0 release Kubernetes and self hosted on VMs are the two supported platforms for running deployments in production.

We would deeply appreciate you helping us get to the v1.0 release. By taking the RC releases, building real world apps and services and giving us feedback on what is broken, missing or inconsistent is essential to uncover mainline and edge scenarios. If you want to jump into the repos and push PRs to fix bugs, provide more testing on your favorite building block or SDK, either as unit tests or end-to-end testing, that would help tremendously. Reading through the docs and finding poorly or undocumented features, inconsistencies and just plain mistakes helps to make Dapr easier for all developers to use. Or just hold a one-day hackathon and then post issues; whatever you feel you can do.  This also means that for the next few months we are asking you to pause on new features being PRed to the repos. Feel free to submit them but expect them to sit there with a few comments and only be merged after v1.0 is released next year. As we are sure you appreciate, getting to a stable v1.0 release is hard without having to also cope with a moving target of new features that extend the scope of Dapr and would effectively push out the v1.0 release date.

We are extremely excited that after one year, we are able to outline this path to a Dapr v1.0 stable release to give you the confidence to use Dapr in production deployments, scoped to a set of capabilities which have been driven by the requirements of real world services built with different programming languages. We are appreciative of anything that you can do to help and continue with us on this amazing journey together. 
